SECURE CODING GUIDELINES
Based on OWASP
Ranjith Manne
CISSP, SSCP, CC, CEH, ISO 27001 LA, ISO 22301 LA, PRINCE2 PRACTITIONER, ITIL Expert
Objectives
Understand the principles of secure coding. 
Understand the challenges. 
Understand the consequences of not following secure coding practices. 
Understand secure coding practices. 
Your responsibilities in securing the applications and staying safe from unacceptable risks. 
OWASP Top 10 Risks.
Problem
CVE-2008-0166 
Flaw in Debian's random number generator 
Leads to predictable random numbers 
Improper change to OpenSSL random generator 
Persisted for almost two years 
Lead to only 2,62,148 possible OpenSSH keys 
Easy for attackers to conduct brute force guessing attacks against cryptographic keys 
Linus's Law – "The law states that given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow." From the JOKE in honour of Linus Torvalds.
Basically a great case to use our Product!
Morale
Access to source code doesn't guarantee bug free code 
Developers should have deep understanding of code before any change 
Code reviews help to spot the problems 
Automated tools can be of help approx. 40% - 50%. Manual reviews are important 
Security Code Reviews
Developer Interviews 
Developer Documentation 
Standards Documentation 
Source Profiling 
System Profiling 
Common Challenges
Unavailability of design documentation or it is outdated 
Third-party components without or less documentation 
Developers availability and / or co-operation 
Limited time 
Secure Coding Practices – Principles
Principle 1
Spread awareness and educate 
Principle 2
Introduce multiple layers of verification 
SAST 
SCA 
DAST 
Penetration Testing 
Principle 3
Test as early as possible to promote responsibility 
Shift-left approach
Input Validation
Before processing, validate:
All client provided data 
All parameters, URLs and HTTP header content (e.g., Cookie names and values). 
Identify and classify data sources into trusted and untrusted. 
Validate data from untrusted sources (e.g., Databases, file streams, etc.). 
Encode data to a common character set before validating. 
Validate all inputs against a whitelist of allowed characters, whenever possible. 
All validation failures should result in input rejection. 
Input Validation
❌ Incorrect Approach
String updateServer = request.getParameter("updateServer");
if(updateServer.indexOf(";") == -1 &&
   updateServer.indexOf("&") == -1){
    String[] commandArgs = {
        Util.windows() ? "cmd" : "/bin/sh",
        "-c", "ping " + updateServer
    };

    Process p = Runtime.getRuntime().exec(commandArgs);
}
✅ Correct Approach
String updateServer = request.getParameter("updateServer");

if(ValidationUtils.isAlphaNumericAllowed(updateServer)){
    String[] commandArgs = {
        Util.windows() ? "cmd" : "/bin/sh",
        "-c", "ping " + updateServer
    };

    Process p = Runtime.getRuntime().exec(commandArgs);
}
Key takeaway: Always validate user input using an allowlist (whitelist) before using it in commands, queries, or application logic. This helps prevent command injection and similar attacks.
Output Encoding
Conduct all encoding on a trusted system (e.g., The server). 
Encode all characters unless they are known to be safe for the intended interpreter. 
Contextually sanitize all output of un-trusted data to queries for SQL, XML, and LDAP. 
Sanitize all output of un-trusted data to operating system commands. 
HTML Encoding
✅ Correct Approach
<div class="form-group">
    <label for="search">Search</label>
    <input type="text" class="form-control" id="search" name="search">

    <input type="submit" id="submit" class="btn btn-primary" value="Search">
    <div class="alert alert-danger" role="alertVisibility">
        Cannot find <%=StringEscapeUtils.escapeHtml(request.getParameter("search"))%>
    </div>
</div>
❌ Incorrect Approach
<div class="form-group">
    <label for="search">Search</label>
    <input type="text" class="form-control" id="search" name="search">

    <input type="submit" id="submit" class="btn btn-primary" value="Search">
    <div class="alert alert-danger" role="alertVisibility">
        Cannot find <%=request.getParameter("search")%>
    </div>
</div>
Key Takeaway
Always HTML-encode untrusted user input before displaying it in a web page. Using functions such as StringEscapeUtils.escapeHtml() helps prevent Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) attacks by converting special HTML characters into their safe encoded equivalents
Authentication & Password Management
Require authentication for all pages and resources, except those specifically intended to be public. 
All authentication controls must be enforced on a trusted system (e.g., The server). 
Use a centralized implementation for all authentication controls, including libraries that call external authenticators services. 
All authentication controls should fail securely. 
Authentication failure responses should not indicate which part of the authentication data was incorrect. 
Enforce password complexity requirements established by policy or regulation. 
Authentication & Password Management – Continued
Enforce password length requirements established by policy or regulation. 8 is common, but 16 is better. 
Enforce account disabling after an established number of invalid login attempts. 
Temporary passwords and links should have a short expiration time. 
Enforce the changing of temporary passwords on the next use. 
Notify users when a password reset occurs. 
The last use (successful or unsuccessful) of a user account should be reported to the user at their next successful login. 
Re-authenticate users prior to performing critical operations.
Session Management
Session identifier creation must always be done on a trusted system (e.g., The server). 
Logout functionality should fully terminate the associated session or connection. 
Establish a session inactivity timeout that is as short as possible, based on balancing risk and business functional requirements. 
Generate a new session identifier on any re-authentication. 
Protect server-side session data from unauthorized access, by other users of the server, by implementing appropriate access controls on the server. 
Access Control
Use a single site-wide component to check access authorization. 
Deny all access if the application cannot access its security configuration information. 
Enforce authorization controls on every request, including those made by server-side scripts, "includes" and requests from rich client-side technologies. 
Segregate privileged logic from other application code. 
Restrict access to files or other resources, including those outside the application's direct control, to only authorized users.
Access Control – Continued
Restrict direct object references to only authorized users. 
Restrict access to user and data attributes and policy information used by access controls. 
Server-side implementation and presentation layer representation of access control rules must match. 
Enforce application logic flows to comply with business rules. 
Implement account auditing and enforce the disabling of unused accounts. 
The application must support disabling of accounts and terminating sessions when authorization ceases. 
Service accounts or accounts supporting connections to or from external systems should have the least privilege possible. 
Access controls should fail securely. 
Cryptography
All cryptographic functions used to protect secrets from the application user must be implemented on a trusted system (e.g., The server). 
Protect master secrets from unauthorized access. 
All random things like numbers, file names, GUIDs, and strings should be generated using the approved random numError Handling & Logging
Do not disclose sensitive information in error responses, including system details, session identifiers or account information. 
Use error handlers that do not display debugging or stack trace information. 
Implement generic error messages and use custom error pages. 
The application should handle application errors and not rely on the server configuration. 
Free the allocated memory when error conditions occur. 
Error handling logic associated with security controls should deny access by default. 
Error Handling & Logging – Continued
All logging controls should be implemented on a trusted system (e.g., The server). 
Logging controls should support both success and failure of specified security events. 
Ensure logs contain important log event data. 
Ensure log entries that include un-trusted data will not execute as code in the intended log viewing interface or software. 
Restrict access to logs to only authorized individuals. 
Do not store sensitive information in logs, including unnecessary system details, session identifiers or passwords. 
Ensure that a mechanism exists to conduct log analysis.
ber generator when these random values are intended to be un-guessable. 
Establish and utilize a policy and process for how cryptographic keys will be managed. 
Cryptographic modules should fail securely.
Error Handling & Logging – Continued
Log everything:
Input validation failures 
Authentication attempts, especially failures 
Access control failures 
Apparent tampering events, including unexpected changes to state data 
Attempts to connect with invalid or expired session tokens 
System exceptions 
Administrative functions, including changes to the security configuration settings 
Backend TLS connection failures 
Cryptographic module failures 
Use a cryptographic hash function to validate log entry integrity. 
Communication Security
Implement encryption for the transmission of all sensitive information. 
Failed TLS connections should not fall back to an insecure connection. 
Utilize TLS connections for all content requiring authenticated access and for all other sensitive information. 
Utilize a single standard TLS implementation that is configured appropriately. 
Specify character encodings for all connections. 
Filter parameters containing sensitive information from the HTTP referrer, when linking to external sites.
System Configuration
Ensure servers, frameworks and system components are running the latest approved version. 
Ensure servers, frameworks and system components have all patches issued for the current version. 
Restrict the web server, process and service accounts to the least privileges possible. 
Remove all unnecessary functionality and files. 
Turn off directory listings. 
Remove test code or any functionality not intended for production, prior to deployment. 
Implement a software change control system to manage and record changes to the code both in development and production. 
Database Security
Use strongly typed parameterized queries. 
Utilize input validation and output encoding and be sure to address meta characters. If these fail, do not run the database command. 
Ensure that variables are strongly typed. 
The application should use the lowest possible level of privilege when accessing the database. 
Use secure credentials for database access. 
Close the connection as soon as possible. 
Remove unnecessary default vendor content (e.g., sample schemas). 
Connection strings should not be hard coded within the application. 
File Management
Do not pass user supplied data directly to any dynamic include function. 
Require authentication before allowing a file to be uploaded. 
Limit the type of files that can be uploaded to only those types that are needed for business purposes. 
Validate uploaded files are the expected type by checking file headers. 
Do not save files in the same web context as the application. 
Prevent or restrict the uploading of any file that may be interpreted by the web server. 
Turn off execution privileges on file upload directories. 
Do not pass directory or file paths, use index values mapped to pre-defined list of paths. 
Memory Management
Utilize input and output control for un-trusted data. 
Double check that the buffer is as large as specified. 
Truncate all input strings to a reasonable length before passing them to the copy and concatenation functions. 
Specifically close resources, don't rely on garbage collection. 
Use non-executable stacks when available. 
Avoid the use of known vulnerable functions (e.g., printf, strcat, strcpy etc.). 
Properly free allocated memory upon the completion of functions and at all exit points.
Buffer Overflow
❌ Incorrect
printf("Enter the master password:\n");
fgets(userPass, 9, stdin);

if(strncmp(userPass, MASTER_PASSWORD, 9) == 0){
    printf("PASSWORD VERIFIED\n");
}
✅ Correct
printf("Enter the master password:\n");
gets(userPass);

if(strncmp(userPass, MASTER_PASSWORD, 9) == 0){
    printf("PASSWORD VERIFIED\n");
}
Note: The slide appears to show gets() as the correct example. In modern secure C programming, gets() is actually unsafe and has been removed from the C standard. Functions such as fgets() with proper bounds checking are the recommended approach.
General Coding Practices
Use tested and approved managed code rather than creating new unmanaged code for common tasks. 
Utilize task specific built-in APIs to conduct operating system tasks. 
Use checksums or hashes to verify the integrity of interpreted code, libraries, executables, and configuration files. 
Protect shared variables and resources from inappropriate concurrent access. 
Explicitly initialize all your variables and other data stores, either during declaration or just before first usage. 
General Coding Practices – Continued
In cases where the application must run with elevated privileges, raise privileges as late as possible, and drop them as soon as possible. 
Do not pass user supplied data to any dynamic execution function. 
Restrict users from generating new code or altering existing code. 
Review all secondary applications, third party code and libraries to determine business necessity and validate safe functionality, as these can introduce new vulnerabilities. 
OWASP Top 10 Risks – Web
OWASP Top 10 Risks – API
Privacy by Design – 7 Principles
Proactive not Reactive; Preventative not Remedial 
Privacy Embedded into Design 
Respect for User Privacy – Keep it User-Centric 
Visibility and Transparency 
Full Functionality – Positive-Sum, not Zero-Sum 
End-to-End Security – Full Lifecycle Protection 
Privacy as the Default Setting 
ISO 27001 Update
ISO 27001:2013
Information Technology – Security Techniques
Information Security Management Systems – Requirements
ISO 27001:2022
Information Security, Cybersecurity and Privacy Protection
Information Security Management Systems – Requirements
New Controls (ISO 27001:2022)
5.7 Threat Intelligence 
5.23 Information Security for Use of Cloud Services 
5.30 ICT Readiness for Business Continuity 
7.4 Physical Security Monitoring 
8.9 Configuration Management 
8.10 Information Deletion 
8.11 Data Masking 
8.12 Data Leakage Prevention 
8.16 Monitoring Activities 
8.23 Web Filtering 
8.28 Secure Coding 
8.9 Configuration Management
Use Standard Templates 
Vendors and Security Organizations 
Update Periodically 
Configuration Management Database (CMDB) 
Change Management 
Owner 
Versioning 
Correlation to Other CIs 
Date of Last Change 
Asset Management Lifecycle 
8.11 Data Masking
8.28 Secure Coding
Good Governance for Secure Coding 
Secure Baseline 
Third-party Components 
Opensource Components 
Static Application Security Testing (SAST) 
Peer Reviews, TDD 
Inventory of Libraries 
